• • '"t'-
1
 
I
l
l
i
l
i 
l
Il
.,.1.-
:- 
.J'••-.
 E
astern 
l_n_d_i
go 
Snake
'' '
# j < _.
i ' <'i '°
I
(
EASTERN INDIGO 
SNAKE RECOVERY 
PLAN
Prepared by
Oaniel W. Speake, Principal Investigator Joan 
Diemer
Joe McGlincy
Alabama Cooperative Wildlife Research Unit Auburn 
University - Auburn, Alabama 36849
for
U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service August 
1981
Approved:
Date: APR 2 2 1982
 
THIS IS THE COMPLETED EASTERN INDIGO SNAKE RECOVERY PLAN.
 IT HAS BEEN 
APPROVED BY THE U.S. FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE. IT DOES NOT 
NECESSARILY REPRESENT OFFICIAL POSITIONS OR APPROVALS OF 
COOPERATING AGENCIES.
THIS PLAN IS SUBJECT TO MODIFICATION AS DICTATED BY NEW FINDINGS AND 
CHANGES IN SPECIES STATUS AND COMPLETION OF TASKS DESCRIBED IN THE 
PLAN. GOALS AND OBJECTIVES WILL BE ATTAINED AND FUNDS EXPENDED 
CONTINGENT UPON APPROPRIATIONS, PRIORITIES, AND OTHER BUDGETARY 
CONSTRAINTS.
LITERATURE CITATIONS SHOULD READ AS FOLLOWS:
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service. 1982. Eastern Indigo Snake Recovery Plan.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, Atlanta, Georgia. 23pp.
Additional copies may be obtained from:
Fish and Wildlife Reference Service Unit i
3840 York Street
Denver, Colorado 80205
I-
..
 
 '!he assistance of nurcerous individuals has been received in the pre­ paration of this 
plan. 'lhe follc:Ming have been especially helpful and their 
assistance is gratefully acknc:Mledged: John Burris, HcMard w. campbell, 
'Jhaggard Colvin, Bill CcxJper, Tan Crutchfield, Rick De.rrnEr,
Larry Landers, !bug Lasher, Jim Layne, Barry Mansell, Ibnna :McMc..-Glincy,
Paul M:>ler, Bob M:>unt and John Stor:m.s.
 
TABLE OF CONTENTS
A S ii
PART I. INTRODOCTION 1
I
Status and Distribution 2
Habitat 4
Limiting Factors 6
PART II. 8
Primacy Objective 8
Recovery Outline 8
Recovery Outline Narrative 10
LITERATURE CITED 17
PART III. IMPLEMENTATION SOIEDULE 20
 
PARI'.I INTRODUCTION
 'llle eastern indigo snake, Drynarchon corais :courzri (Uolbrook) is one of eight 
subspecies of a primarily tropical species. Spanning scne 55°
of latitude, the overall range of P£.)'m3rChon oorais extends :Eran the south­ eastern u.S. 
Coastal plain to northern Argentina (Smith 1941) • Six of the 
eight subspecies are distributed in South or Central America; only the eastern indigo and the 
Texas indigo (Dryrnarchon oorais erebennus)• occur
within the United States.
 The eastern indigo is a vecy large, fairly stout snake attaining a maximum total length 
of a1::x::>ut 8½ feet. The head is slightly, if at all, distinct from the neck; anal 
plate undivided; scales large, srrooth, shiny, in 17 rows at midlxx:ly. 'lhe 
color is unifonn lustrous blue-black, except for sarre reddish or cream-colored suffusion 
a1::x::>ut the chin, throat, and cheeks. Spectacular ooloration 
is not the eastern indigo snake's only physical attribute; the size of the animal is 
notevlOrthy as well. Adults
average 1. 8 m (6 feet) and the :maximum recorded size is over 2. 6 m (8. 6
feet) (Conant 1975). 'Ibis places the subspecies in oontention for the title of thelargest 
colubrid snake in N::>rth Aln:rica.  Despite its size, the eastern indigo 
snake is often mistaken for other black snakes within its range.  Smaller 
specimens may resercble the cx:mron black racer (Coluber oonstrictor) ; ha..rever, the latter is 
generally a slender, fast-noving snake with a white chin and less glossy ooloration. 
 Positive identification can be achieved by inspection of the anal plate: single in 
indigos and divided in racers.
2
Status and Distribution
 Past literature references to the distribution of the eastern indigo snake have usually 
been quite generalized. Ditmars (1940) rrentioned its 
occurence in the southeastern states and westward to the Rio Grande in
Tex.as. In his review of the subspecies in 1941, th listed the range as 
extending fran South Carolina to Florida and westward to southem
I.Duisiana. Wright and Wright (1957) listed the range of couperi from South carolina to 
Florida and problematical for iabama., Mississippi, and IDuisiana, with 
no valid records surfacing from the latter state. M::>re recently,
Conant (1975) reported the snake's occurrence in southeast Georgia and p=>...ninsular 
Florida to the Keys, with disjunct p:,pulations in the Florida panhandle and south Alabama.
 Behler and King (1979) follcwed suit but did not 
include Alabarra in the current range. 'Ihe only kncwn Alabama records are 
those of Ioding (1922), Haltom (1931) and Neill (1954). While Cooke 
(1954) acknCMledged the subspecies' exi.stance in Mississippi, no recent valid specinens 
have been found (M:>unt and Speake in press) .  Hcwever, two 
recent sightings in south Mississippi by zoologists were reported by Burris
(personal cormn.mication). A sighting in Jasper county, South carolina
(northeast of Clyo, Georgia) occurred in 1954 (Brown, pers. corrm.). 'Ihe 
species is extremely rare if it still occurs naturally in the States of Alabama, Mississippi 
and South carolina.
'Ihe type locality was described in Georgia (Holbrook 1842) as "the
dry pine hills south of the Altamaha". Holbrook (1842) credits his k:now'ledge of the 
snake to J. Hamilton Couper, Esq. of St. Sinons Island. In the :Re­ port 
of the National Museum, o:,pe (1898) referred in passing to speci.Irens fran the sea islands 
of Georgia. HCMever, an ecological survey of the
3
Georgia coast in the late 196Q's (Johnson et al. 1974) revealed no indigo 
snake specimens on the barrier islands.
 In providing a detailed description of the color of the snake, Wright and 
Wright (1957) referred to a 1922 specinen fran the Okefenokee Swarrp.
Additionally, naturalist Franklin Russell described an encounter with an indigo snake in the 
SWanp during the late 1960's (Russell, 1973).
 '!he overall Georgia distribution of the indigo snake was described by M3.rtof 
(1956) simply as the la,..rer and middle Coastal Plain. Subsequently, COnant (J.975) provided 
a range map that inclu:ied the southeastern quadrant of the state. In 1975, the Savannah 
Science Museum extended the range by providing an Effingham county location (M:>ulis 
1976). In his paper on the eastern indigo snake's status in the southeast, Lawler 
(1977) mentioned an additional record outside COnant's basic range (Seminole county). A distri­ 
bution map in Geo;:gia's Protected Wildlife (Cdom et al.  1977) designated current 
locations in 14 coastal plain counties. The nost recent published indigo records have been 
provided by the Savannah Science Museum: ten specimen locales in nine counties 
(Williamson and M:>ulis 1979). A study
by the Alabama Cooperative Wildlife :Research Unit on the distribution of the indigo snake 
in Georgia is nearing a:impletion. Recent sightings of
indigo snakes have been made in 50 Georgia counties and the species is thought
to be maintaining viable populations in protected areas of good habitat in
the state.
 In Florida, the status of the indigo is u:nkncMn at this time because no surveys have been 
conducted. Florida biologists (Tan Crutchfield, Howa:ro canpbel.1, 
Rick Detmer, Jim Layne, Bany Mansell, Paul M:>ler and John Stonns, pers. a::mn.) generally 
agree that there are local populations throughout the
4
peninsula, and, in some localities, the snakes are o::m:ron or abundant. In
parts of southern Florida, fran al::out Sarasota south, the snake is said to
f I -
be locally abundant and connon in many places. North of Sarasota, in the 
peninsula, the snake is thought to be ccmron in several localities and abundant in a few.
 'lhe panhandle has only a few knCM.n small populations and the 
indigo show.d probably be considered rare in that region.
 Because of a rather precipitous decline in eastern indigo snake numbers in the 
1960's and11970 ' s , the species has been considered threatened in
the southeastern region (fuunt and Speake in press) and endangered in Alabana (fuunt •1976).
 'Ihe eastern indigo snake was granted full protection in Florida in 1971, 
was placed•under protection in Georgia in 1977, and was listed as threatened by the Federal 
government (Federal Register Vol. 43
No. 52:11082 - 11093) in 1978.
Habitat
'Ihe habitat of the eastern subspecies varies san:ewhat latitudinally.
Carr (1940) re:ported utilization of high pineland in central and north Florida, while 
flatwoods, dry glades, tropical harmocks, and nmckland fields constituted the habitat in 
south Florida. Lawler (1977) stated
that the species was often ccm:ron along canal banks in south Florida, where crab holes 
W=re utilized in lieu of gopher tortoise burrCMS. Kochman (1978) listed the Florida indigo 
as occupying seven out of eight designated ter­ restrial habitat types (mixed hardwcx::>d-pine 
was anitted) and five of eleven wetland habitats. 'lhe species seems to be less 
restricted in habitat re­ quirerrents in the southern portion of its range than in 
the north - prob­ ably a :function of clima.te and the species ' winter behavior.
5
 In Georgia, the indigo snake is strongly associated with the xeric sandridge habitat 
(Speake et al. 1978). Described by HaJ:per (1906) in his discussion 
of the "Altamaha Grit" region of Georgia, these ridges occur primarily an the east .or northeast 
side of the major coastal plain streams. Geologically, they are found on Miocene and Plia-.-
Pleistocene deposits. '.Ibe vegetational comm.m:i:ty supported by the 
deep droughty soils has been des­ cribed as "sandhill" or ''dry pire barren" (Harper l906)., 
oak-pine--heath
(Bozeman 1971) and dwarf-oak forest (W:larton 1978) .   It is probably nost 
camonly referred to as a longleaf pine,-scrub oak association, with long- leaf pi.re (Pinus 
palustris) , turkey oak {Quercus laevis)_ and wiregrass (Aristida stricta) being the 
principal ca.np::>nents. Regarded as fire sub­ 
cl.imaxes, these plant ca:mn.m.ities have an average burn frequency of 5 to 10 years 
(Wharton 1978) and succeed to a laurel oak (Quercus laurifolia) association in the absence 
of fire (Bozeman 1971).  Intimately associated with 
this xeric habitat, in the southeastern coastal plain, is the gopher
tortoise (Gopherus polyphemus) (Auffenberg and Franz 1975). 'Ihe indigo snake
utilizes the tortoise burrCM as both a refuge and overwintering site. A 
recent Georgia study (L3nders and Speake in press) shc:Ms that all radio­ instn:nnented 
indigo snakes studied during winter (N=24) selected the sand­ hills as winter habitat and 94% 
of the winter dens were tortoise burrCMS.
Indigo snakes also nested, foraged and denned in tortoise burrcMS during other seasons.
 'D:le den of this onespecies plays an integral role in the sandhill 
ecosystem, providing a refuge for a host of vertebrate c::on:rcensals
(Pope 1946, carr 1952, Speake and M:>Unt 1973, Iawler 1977, L3nders and
Speake in press) as well as sace 32 species of arthropods (Yo,,mg and Goff
6
1939). Speake et al. (1978) showed that many Georgia indigo snakes rrove fran sandhill 
habitat to the vicinity of agricultural fields and stream­ bottom thickets in sumrcer and that 
they make extensive noverrents during the late surmer and fall.
Limiting Factors
 In addition to the total loss of indigo snake habitat when land is converted to house sites 
or rON crops, nn.ich of the foresteci sandhill habitat in south Georgia and parts of Florida 
is being degraded so that its value to the indigo snake is greatly reduced. "Natural" longleaf pine-
turkey
oak stands are frequently protecteci fran fire too long and the oak ccm-­ 
ponent is allowed to becorre too dominant. Many areas that have been con­ verted to pine 
plantations are not being control burned properly or have a pine overstory that is too dense.
 Habitat loss or degredation is probably the single rrost 
important indigo snake limiting factor.
 Because the indigo snake is large, conspicuous, and relatively slc:M, it is an 
easy mark for persons wh::) kill snakes on sight. M::>reover, the docile 
nature and handsare appearance of this nonpoisonous snake give it a high value in the pet trade.
 Collection of the indigo snake combined with habitat
destruction, highway fatalities, and deliberate persecution led to a noticeable decline of the indigo 
snake in Florida by 1971. According to Blaney and Blaney (1974), the decline in the numbers of 
indigo snakes in southern Florida can be directly attributed to overcollecting for the pet trade. s
authors point out that prices for indigo snakes anong mail order dealers of reptiles and arrphibians of 
the Southeast increased from $17.00 in.1965 for an average sized adult to $90.00 in 1973. Since that 
tine prices have continued
7
to increase up to $225.00 per specimen (Lawler 1977). Collectors for pet 
dealers were attempting to buy specimens from Georgia rattlesnake hunters in 1977 
(Colvin, pers. ccmn.).
 'lhere is also serious concern about the future of this species in areas where gopher 
tortoise burrows may be gassed because it has been shc:M.n that indigo snak.es, which cormonly 
use such burrows for dens, are likely
to be killed if the burrc:MS in which they reside are gassed by rattlesnake hunters {Speake 
and futmt 1973). Effects of pesticides, which accumulate in indigo snalces since they are high 
on the food chain (Lawler 1977, Speake 1980 unpublished data), are not knc:Mn. Natural 
limiting factors on the species are JX)Orly kn.own.
8
PARI' II RECOVERY
Prina:ry Objective
 The ultirrate recovery plan objective should be to insure that nU11Erous indigo snake 
p:>pulations exist and are reproducing and protected where suitable 
habitat still exists in the historical range of the species.
This will require research and managerrent along several lines as described in the 
plan. Once this is accomplished, and all States in the range of the snake provide legal 
protection, delisting might then be considered since the snake would be protected from 
interstate comrerce by the
I.acy Act.
Recovery Outline
1. Maintain and protect existing populations of eastern indigo snakes.
11. lDcate and delineate present populations through field surveys and 
distribution studies.
12. Provide needed habitat.
121. Acquire and/or manage and p:r.otect areas necessary to maintain 
viable populations.
122. Detennine habitat requirerrents.
123. Conduct studies of population ecology, novernents, and
food habits.
13. Provide inproved protection for existing populations.
131. Enact legislation protecting the indigo snake in each state where it 
occurs or probably occurs.
132. Prohibit the practice of introducing toxic substances into gopher tortoise 
burrows on public lands and encourage
ending the practice on private lands inhabited by indigo snakes.
133. Enact legislation and/or regulations that will provide nore protection for 
the gopher tortoise.
134. Detennine the effects and extent of exposure to pesticides and provide 
protection where possible.
9
14. M:mitor populations and habitats.
141. Detennine methods for nonitoring populations on study
areas and sample areas.
142. t-bnitor habitat trerrls.
2. Reestablish populations \obere feasible.
21. Release indigos at chosen sites.
211. Identify suitable reintroduction sites.
212. Obtain stock for reintrcx::l.uction.
212-1.  M:Lintain a captive breeding program and research on captive 
breeding and restocking potential as needed.
212-2. Obtain stock fran the wild when necessa:ry.
22. Jl.bnitor results of reestablishnent attanpts.
3. Improve the attitude of the public and their behavior tcMa.rds
indigo snakes.
31. Educate the general public regarding the plight of the indigo snake and the 
need for recovery efforts.
311. Publish scientific data.
312. Produce and distribute educational n:aterials for the various 
camnunications iredi.a.
32. M:lke special efforts to contact armers or leaseholders of large tracts of 
sandhill habitat.
10
Recavery Outline Narrative
1. Maintain and protect existing populations of eastern indigo snakes.
11. Iocate and delineate present populations through field surveys arrl distrirution 
studies.
 'Ihe status and distrirution of the indigo snake is not well known in 
Florida and  should be investigated in the near future. There is sane 
reason to believe that protection established by the State in 1971 and strengthened 
by the Federal government in 1978
rray have had an important beneficial effect. The species may no longer be threatened in 
southern Florida. SUrveys have been ..recently canpleted for 
Alabana and are essentially canplete for Geo:rgia.
12. Provide needed habitat.
 Task 121. Areas of suitable habitat throughout the historical range of the 
snake should be selected and  designated as sanctuaries for 
irrligo snakes and gopher tortoises. Management of the habitat should 
encourage the maintenance of cx:mmunity types that enhance the
welfare of the snake. Ideally there should be penranent protection
\
for two 10,000 acre tracts, one each in Geo:rgia and Florida.
Management needs of the sandhill habitat have been outlined
by Landers and Speake (in press}• In longleaf pine-scrub oak stands, the 
hardwood ccmponent should be judiciously controlled. A high density of oaks is 
acceptable if the canopy is kept open and nost st.ans are
in the small diameter classes. Where trees are so dense that
herbaceous grourrl caver is sparse, hardwoods should be thinned by . .
nechanical or chemical neans, or if feasible, by a hot surnn:er 1::urn.
11
Since this canmunity originally included longleaf pines, a pine canponent 
should be reestablished where it has been reduced in the :i;a.st; pine needles are 
important in carrying fire in the
sparse understor.y. W:iere ground fuel is adequate in natural stands,
burn frequency should be least once ever.y 5 to 10 years, rut intervals of 2 to 4 
years between winter rums have been sha.-m to be beneficial.
 Slash pine plantations, if properly managed, can supp:::>rt viable gopher 
tortoise and indigo snake p:>pU.lations. Stands daninated by pine rut 
which contain a significant scrub oak ccmponent can supp:::>rt breeding gopher 
tortoise colonies and receive use by indigo snakes and nany associated species.
 WindrCMs within clear-cuts and plantations are used heavily 
by indigo snakes.  Therefore, these brush piles should be left intact and 
not flattened during the rotation, a canrron practice for cosmetic purposes.
 Wiru::ircMs are also beneficial to bobwhites (Brunswig and
 Johnson 1972), deer (Hazel et al. 1977), and other 
an:i.nals.
 camercial thinning is beneficial in opening the canopy and increasing 
understor.y developnent in pine plantations. In consid­ eration for burrCM-dwelling 
an:i.nals in forest management, it is recanrrended that low intensity site preparation 
(e.g. rurning)
be used rather than nore intensive nethcxis (e.g. root raking). The nost important 
factor in plantation rra.nagernent is prescribed rurning. Due to the great biamss in 
the understor.y, it is recan­ nended that burning be practiced annually or biennially.
12
 The habitat oonditions outlined here which favor indigo snakes are produced 
by management sche:nes for lxlbwhites and white-tailed deer. Therefore, 
management for game am.ma.ls on these xeric sites can be coordinated with that for 
the indigo snake, if adequate protection fran exploitation of the latter is provided.
 M:>re research is needed to establish management techniques beneficial to 
the species. Pranising areas for research include 
dete:aninatlon of optimum rurning and thinning frequencies, and the 
density of tortoise burro.vs necessai:y to support indigo snake populations in the 
northern :p3.rt of the range.
 Task 122. In Georgia, individual indigo snakes use rrany tortoise 
burro.vs over a large hare range (sane are several hundred ha in size). The 
number of indigo snake locations is
correlated with the number of tortoise burrcws (Landers and Speake in press). Its 
distribution in the State is limited to areas with extensive sandhills interspersed 
with wetland habitats such as drainageways, river swamps, and cypress ponds.
 The long seasonal novernents of indigo snakes in Georgia, which can be 
several kn in extent, have an important bearing on reestab­ lismient of the species.
 Areas of habitat to be protected, managed, and restocked, if necessary, 
should ideally be several thousand acres in size, the larger the better.
 In south Florida the snake occurs in a number of habitats, rut it does sean to 
prefer pinewood.s and terrestrial habitats, and avoids Everglades narsh. Further 
habitat studies are needed for this portion of the range.
13
 Task 123. The indigo snake fea:ls largely on other snakes, s:na.11 tortoises, 
s:na.11 n:amrals, and amphibians and appears to be at the top of the insect-amphibian-
reptile fooo. chain of the sa.rrlhills.
 For better nana.gement, more specific inforrration is nea:la:1 on fooo. ha.bits, 
mortality, reprcxiuctive rates, and novernents throughout the range of the snake. High 
priority should be given to a south Florida study,since worlc is already 11
 undei:way in the northern p:rrt of the 
range.
13. Pro.ride improved protection for existing populations.
 Task 131. Fa:leral protection should be continua:1 and strictly enforca:1 to 
prevent ccrnmercial exploitation. The species is not protecta:1 by Alabama 
law, and releases of 104 indigo snakes ha.ve recently been rrade in that State. Once 
all states in the range of the snake provide legal protection, and nurrerous reproducing 
populations exist in suitable habitat insuring long-tenn protection fran adverse habitat 
m:::xlification, delisting might then be considera:1 since the snake would be protecta:1 
fran interstate ccmnerce by the Lacy 1'.ct.
 Task 132. State laws prohibiting the gassing of tortoise b.rrrCMs should be 
encouraga:1. Rules and regulations renning gassing should be establisha:1 in National 
Forests, state parks, and other public lands. Large private landowners and leaseholders 
such as forest irrlustries and hunting clubs should be encouraged to prevent tortoise 
l:::iurrCM gassing on their lands.
 Task 133. Protection of the gopher tortoise should be increased since the welfare 
of the indigo snake is so closely tia:1 to that of the tortoise in sare portions of its 
distribution.
14
 Task 134. The impact of pesticides on the eastern indigo snake should be 
investigated. This species is apparently long-lived and. relatively 
high on the food chain. It ne.y be susceptible to pesticides directly by contact or 
secondarily through feeding on previously exposed prey an.inals.
14. MJnitor p:,pulations and habitats.
 Tasks 141. and 142. In order that population trends and status 
can be rreasured it will be necessary to develop techniques for estimating population 
levels. A long tenn rronitoring program is also needed to track habitat trends.
2. Reestablish p:,pulations where feasible.
 Research should be continued on reproductive biology, captive propagation, and 
restocking potential since exploitation and. persecution have probably eliminated breeding 
stock fran suitable habitat in the past and the species reproductive potential rray be rather 
low. Research 
underway shows pranising results with captive propagation; restocking potential of captive-
hatched stock is currently under evaluation.
 Task 21. Since 1979, the Alabarra Cooperative Wildlife Unit has released 
indigos on an experimental basis at 9 sites in Florida, Alabarra, Georgia, and
 Mississippi. Future releases will in part be contingent 
on the success of these experiments.
15
 Task 211. Reintroo.uction sites should be a minimum of 200 ha in size and 
selected on the basis of (1) their similarity to the closest knCMn habitat that is 
presently or was historically occupied by the species, and (2) the degree to which 
such sites will provide long-tenn security for the species and can p::>ssibly be 
nanaged if necessary. Habitat characterization studies und.er Task 122. ha.ve been 
canpleted for the northern part of the range, rut further wo:rk is needed for south 
Florida.
 Task 212-1. The Alabana. Cooperative Wildlife Unit is currently being funded to 
develop propagation techniques, and to proo.uce indigos for trial reintroductions. This 
type of wo:rk should be continued until the techniques are fully developed and/or it 
becanes evident there is no longer a need for captive propa.gation.
 Task 212-2. Indigo snakes taken fran the wild for reintroo.uction should cane 
fran areas where indigos are abundant, or where habitat is about to be destroyed.
 Released snakes should also cane fran parent stock originating as 
near as p::>ssible to the release site.
 Task 22. Reintroductions should be nonitored until it is evident that 
reproo.uction ha.s occurred and a viable population ha.s developed.
16
3. Improve the public attitude and l::iEiliavior to.vards the indigo snake.
 Task 311. 'As research is canpleted, the data should be rra.de available to biologists and 
other professional conservationists through publications in technical journals and
 proceedings of symposia and other n:eetings.
In this way the various governrrental agencies that have sare resp:,nsibility for indigo snake 
recover:y will be better inforned about ho.v to proceed.
 Task 312. Public opinion concerning snakes in general and indigo snakes in 
:p3.rticular will need to be improved so that the camon tendency to kil1 snakes on sight 
wil1 be decreased. The general public can be reached 
through rrovies, television programs, lectures with slide series, and popular articles in 
news:p3.pers and rragazines. Enphasis should be placed on the 
hannless and beneficial nature of the species and the causes of its decline and a general 
description of recover:y efforts.
 Task 32. Ver:y important segments of the public as far as indigo snakes are concerned 
are o.vners or leaseholders of large tracts of sandhill habitat. The habits of this species 
bring it into contact with agri­ cultural workers, loggers, and hunters. Indigo snakes are 
especially vulnerable to hunters (snake, quail, and deer hunters) 
because of the snake's increased activities during the fall and winter breeding season and their 
tendency to concentrate on the sandridges and rrove about and ba.sk during the winter. 
CMners and leaseholders of large tracts should
be infooned about the carp:1tibility of indigo snake rranagement with quail, deer, and 
timber production and the beneficial habits of the indigo snake. Ha.bitat rranagerrent 
rreasures such as controlled burning or thinning of starrls should be ariphasized along 
with protection of the indigo snake and the gopher tortoise.
17
LITERATURE 
CITED
Auffenberg, W., and R. Franz, 1975. The status anddistribution of C:opherus polyphenus.
 U.S.F.W. Rep. 48 pp, and App.
Behler, J. and W. King. 1979. 'llle Audd::>on SOciety field guide to North Amer­
ican reptiles. A.F. Knopf. NEM York. 718 pp.
Blaney, R.M and P.K. Blaney. 1974•. Effects of al exploitation on 
southeastern fauna. Meno. report to the Southeastern Endangered Species 'Workshop.
 Tallahassee, FL.
Bozeman, J.R. 1971. A sociologic and geographic study of the sand ridge vege­
tation in the Coastal Plain of Georgia. Ph.D. dissertation. Dept. of 
Botany, Univ. of N.C., Chapel Hill.
Brunsivig, N.L. and A.S. Johnson.  1972. Bobwhite quail foods and populations on pine 
plantations in the Georgia Piedrront during the first seven years following site preparation.
 Proc. Southeastern Assoc. Garre and Fish a:mn.
26: 96 - 107.
Carr, A.F., Jr. 1940. A a::>ntriliution to the herpetology of Florida. Univ. Fla.
Publ., Biol. Sci. Serv., 3 (1): 1 - 118.
Carr, A.F. , Jr. 1952. Handl:x:x)k of turtles. canstock Publ. Assoc. Ithaca,
N.Y. 560 pp.
Conant, R. 1975. A field guide to reptiles andamphibians of eastern and central
North Ainerica. 2nd Edition. Houghton-Mifflin Co., Boston, 429 pp.
Cooke, F.A. 1954. Snakes of Mississippi. Survey Bull. :Vri.ss. Ga1te and Fish
Comm. 40 pp.
Cope, E.D. 1898. The croo::xlilians, lizards, and snakes of North JI..Irerica. An­
nual Ieport of the U.S. National Museum. pp. 155 - 1294.
Ditmars, R. 1940. 'lli.e reptiles of North America. Doubleday, Doran and Co., Inc. 
New York.  476 pp.
Haltan, W.L. 1931. Alabama reptiles. Alabama Geol. Surv. Nat. Hist. Mus.,
pap. No. ll. vi + 145 pp.
Harper, R.M. 1906. A phytogeographical sketch of the Altamaha Grit region of the Coastal 
plain of Georgia. Annals N.Y. Acad. Sci. No.17 (1): 1 - 415.
Hazel, D.W. , A.J. Webb, and S. T. Cllenny. 1957. Deer forage production associa­ ted 
with the practice of site a::>nversion in a North ca:rolina pocx,sin. Proc. 
Southeast. Assoc. Fish and Wildl• .Agencies 30: 513 - 524.
18
.
Holbrook, J.E. 1842. North Am:rican herpetology: a description of the rep­ tiles 
inhabiting the United States. J. Dobson. Philadelphia. 5 vols.
Johnson, A.S., and H. Hillestad, and S. Shanholtzer, and G. Shanholtzer. 1974.
An ecological survey of the coastal region of Georgia. Nat. Park Serv.
Sci. M:mograph Series 3. 232 pp.
Kocbrnan, H.I. 1978. Eastern indigo snake. pp 68 - 69. In: R.W. McDiarmid 
(ed.) • Rare and Endangered Biota of Florida, 1mph.ibians and Reptiles, Vol. 3. Univ. 
Press of Fla. , Gainesville.
Landers, J.L. and D.W. Speake. in press. Managerrent needs of sandhill reptiles
in southern Georgia. Pree. Southeast. Assoc. Fish and Wildl. Agencies 34.
Lawler, H.E. 19 77. 'lhe status of Drymarchon corais couperi (Holbrook) , the eastern indigo 
snake, in the southeastern United States. Herp. Review 8 (3): 76 - 79.
I.Dding, H.P. 1922. A preliminary catalog of Alabama. reptiles andarrphibians.
Ala. Geel. Sur. Nat. Hist. Mus., pap. No. 5, 59 pp.
Martof, B. 1956. Amphibians and reptiles of Georgia. Univ. of Ga., Athens.
M::)ulis, R. 1976. Autecology of the eastern indigo snake, D:rymarchon corais 
couperi. Bull. N.Y. Herp. Coe. 12: 12 - 23.
M::)unt, R.H. 1976. A:rrq::hiliians and reptiles. in pp. 66 - 79. H. Boschung, ed.
Endangered and threatened plants and animals of Alabama. Bull. No. 2.
Ala. Museum of Nat. History. The Univ. of Ala. , University, Ala.
M::)unt, R.H. and D.W. Speake, in press. Drymarchon corais couperi (Holbrook) in 
Threatened and endangered vertebrates of the Southeast. Bull. Tall Timbers Res. Sta., 
Tallahassee, Fla.
Neill, W.T. 1954. Ranges and taxonomic allocations of amphibians and reptiles in the 
southeastern United States. Publ. Res. Div. Ibss Allen's Rept. Inst. 1: 75 - 96.
O:::lan, R., and J.  McO:>llum, M. Neville, and D. Ettmann. 1977. Georgia's protected 
wildlife.  Endangered Wildlife Program, Game and Fish Div., DNR. 51 pp.
Pope, c. H. 1946. Turtles of the United States and Canada. Alfred A. Knopf
Inc. N.Y. 343 pp.
Russell, F. 1973. The Okefenokee Swarrp. Time-Life Books. Ne-w York. 184 pp.
Smith, H.M. 1941. A review of the subspecies of the indigo snake (prymarchon
corais couperi) J. Wash. Acad. Sci. 31 (11): 466 - 481.
Speake, D.W. and M:>unt, R.H. 1973. Sate possible ecological effects of rattle­ snake 
roundups in the Southeastern coastal Plain. Proc. 27th Annu. O::>nf.
S.E. Assoc. Game and Fish o:mn. 27: 267 - 277.
19
Speake, D.W. and J.A. McGlincy, and T.A. Colvin. l978. Ecology and management of the 
eastern indigo snake in Georgia: a progress report. Pages 64 -
73. in R.R. Oclan and L. Landers, eds. Proc. Rare and Endangered Wildl.
Syrop.-,-Georgia DNR, Ga:rre and Fish Div. , Tech. Bull. WIA.
Wharton, C.H. 1978. 'lbe natural environrrents of Georgia. Georgia DNR.
Williamson, G. and R. !vbulis. 1979. Distribution of Georgia amphibians and reptiles 
in the Savannah Science Musemn. COllection Special Publ. No. 1 Sav. Sci. Mus. 
Inc. , Savannah.
Wright, A.H. and A.A. Wright. 1957. Handbook of snakes of the United States of 
Canada. CCinstock Publ. Assoc., Ithaca, New York. 2 vols. ll05 pp.
Young, F. and c. G:>ff. 1939. An annotated list of thearthropods found in
the bur:rows of the Florida gopher tortoise. Florida Entarol. 22: 53 - 62.
20
PART III. ••
IMPLEMENTATION 
SCHEDULE
Priorities within this section (Column 4) have been assigned according to the following:
Priority 1 - Those actions absolutely necessary to prevent extinction of the species.
Priority 2 - Those actions necessary to maintain the species' current population status.
Priority 3 - All other actions necessary to provide for full recovery of the species.
Eastern Indigo Snake IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE
N
I-"'
 
 
Eastern Indigo Snake (Continued) IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULE
Resoonsible Aqencv Esti ated' Fiscal Year Costs
General Task Task FWS
Category Plan Task Number Priority Duration Region Program Other* FY 82 FY 83 FY 84
 Co111nents/Notes
I 7  Continue captive breeding 212-1 3 Ongoing 4 FL,GA,SC 30,000 32,000 35,000 Ongoing by 
AL Coop Unit. studies     AL,MS    Costs shown cover some 
trial
releases (Task 21).
I 13 Capture wild stock for 212-2 3 4 yrs. 4
 FL,GA,SC, release   
  AL,MS
I 13  Identify reintroduction 211 l Ongoing 4 FL,GA,sc•, Some work 
completed by sites     AL,MS AL Coop Unit.
I 13  Release indigos at 21 3 Ongoing 4 FL,GA,SC, Trial introductions made 
by chosen sites     AL,MS AL Coop Unit in FL, GA, 
MS, A
I 1 Monitor reestablishment 22 3 Ongoing 4 FL,GA,SC, 10,W)O 10,000 10,000 Trial introductions 
being
AL,MS monitored by AL Coop Unit.
0 1 Publish research data 311 3 Ongoing 4 FL,GA 2,000 2,000 2,000
 N
0 1 Produce and distribute 312 3 Ongoing 4 FL,GA,SC, 2,000
 2,000 2,000 educational materials    
 AL,MS,FS,
ES,P
S
0 1  Seek cooperation of owners 32 3 Ongoing 4 FL,GA,SC, 1,000. 1,000
 1,000 and leaseholders of large     /\L,MS
tracts of sandhill habitat
*Abbreviations:
FL - Florida Game and Frei1h Water Fish Comm ssion  FS - U.S Forest S rvice 
GA - Georgia Game and Fis! Divisi n DOD - Depfl.rtment of 
Defense SC - South Carolina WildlJ "'e and I arine Res urces Dep.  PS - 
U.S Park Ser ice
AL - Alabama Division of C l'Jme and Fish SA - Sta e Agencie
MS•- Mississippi Departme1 It of Wi dlife Con ervation ES - Cooberative E tension : ervice
,.
23
GENERAL CATEGORIES FOR IMPLEMENTATION SCHEDULES*
Information Gathering - I or R (research)
1. Population status
2. Habitat status
3. Habitat requirements
4. Management techniques
5. Taxonomic studies
6. Demographic studies
7. Propagation
8. Migration
9. Predation
10. Competition
11. Disease
12. Environmental contaminant
13. Reintroduction
14. Other information
Management - M
 1. Propagation
2. Reintroduction
3. Habitat maintenance and manipulation
4. Predator and competitor control
5. Depredation control
6. Disease control
 7. Other management 
Acquisition - A
1. Lease
2. Easement
3. Management agreement
4. Exchange
5. Withdrawal
6. Fee title
7. Other
Other - O
1. Information and education
2. Law enforcement
3. Regulations
4. Administration
* (Column 1) - Primarily for use by the U.S. Fish and
Wildlife Service.
 
